hello I'm Gea gorami thanks for joining
us we're returning to our top story in
the Middle East where a large scale
Israeli military operation in the
occupied West Bank is continuing into
the second day Israel says five
Palestinian Fighters were killed whilst
hiding in a mosque in the city of taram
according to Palestinian sources the
death tollar has now risen to 17 people
since Israeli military operations began
the BBC has not been able to verify
those figures earlier the UN Secretary
General called on Israel to Halt its
major military op ation in the north of
the territory immediately well I'm
joined by our Middle East correspondent
John donison who is in Janine John just
bring us up to date with what's going on
where you
are well here in Janine eight
Palestinians have been killed by Israeli
forces since yesterday uh one person
today and we just actually saw an
Israeli uh military bulldo ahead towards
the refugee camp which sits behind me in
uh need so this operation is ongoing a
lot of the focus is in taram as you say
which is a Palestinian City to the west
of here just driving into Janine this
morning all but one road uh was closed
blocked off by the Israeli Army and we
were told and warned by uh Palestinian
taxi drivers that their cars were being
shot at uh by Israeli soldiers Israel
for its part of course says it's
carrying out a counterterrorism
operation and is trying to protect its
citizens and what is the the response of
the people that you might have spoken to
and how are things likely to unfold in
the next few days have we got had any
guidance from the Israeli
military well in terms of what people
are saying to us here we were just
basically asking people on the way into
Janine whether it was safe uh to go in
and people are obviously worried
normally this is a vibrant bustling busy
uh City and today it is absolutely
deserted all the businesses virtually
are shuted up and no one is out on the
streets everyone is in their homes as
for how long it's going to go on uh well
we don't really know Israel uh says as I
say that uh they are determined to
tackle uh militant groups here in the
northern West Bank they say that they
have been stockpiling weapons is alleges
that those weapons are being funded by
Iran and certainly when I was in taram
late last year you do see people uh
militants with very very uh
sophisticated weapons which cost a lot
of money on the black market now people
tell you that many of those weapons are
actually being smuggled in by criminal
gangs from Israel although some smaller
weapons are coming in uh from Jordan and
John um have the Israelis given any
further information or is it known on
the ground about which militant groups
are operating
[Music]
there well the one they uh are sort of
making uh the most announcements about
is a senior commander in nor shamps the
refugee camp uh in taram he is
affiliated with Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and they say he was killed uh
yesterday uh in a Israeli operation
there we have had a statement from
hamas's military Wing which came late
yesterday saying six of its members have
been killed but we are also aware from
doctors at the hospitals in this part of
the West Bank that a number of civilians
have also uh been killed too John
donison thank you very much there live
in Janine for us well a little earlier I
spoke to Aisha Mansour the West Bank
director for medical aid for
Palestinians and she told me about her
work and what she has seen on the
ground thank you for having me um our
work focuses on supporting the
healthcare system and part of it is also
supporting the emergency response uh
since yesterday we're seeing the largest
Invasion by the Israeli military into
the West Bank since the second and since
2002 we woke up yesterday morning to
news that the Israeli forces have
invaded the towns of Janine tulam uh and
Tas as well as nabas later cutting off
the North and limiting access to the
north um with you know major major uh
attacks going on in those towns and what
does that mean what does that mean for
the people that you are working
with yes I mean today the news is that
there have been 18 people uh killed um
with with our partners our partners are
reporting that um accessing Healthcare
and accessing the injured have been very
difficult uh during this Invasion the
paramedics prcs Palestine red crescent
Society has reported that their teams
are having difficulty being able to
access patients and injured in order to
for them to provide the health care
needed and and take them to the
hospitals that are needed we're also um
hearing from our partners that hospitals
are being blocked and um anybody coming
into a hospital or leaving a hospital is
being checked um ID checked by the
Israeli military and uh in in terms of
uh how many of your staff were able to
move around and how they are affected
too can you give us a sense of of you
know how big your charity is without
obviously giving away any difficult
details yes um most our team members are
based here in ralo where I'm based and
actually yesterday on the day of the um
Invasion our team members were supposed
to go up to Janine um to meet with some
of our partners including the Palestine
red crescent Society Unfortunately they
weren't able to go because of the
invasion so so these kinds of regular
invasions that have been occurring um
since 2023 but more even more frequently
since um the war on Gaza from starting
last October uh these invasions have
really limited the ability for our team
to travel and access um those areas to
to follow up with our partners it's also
limited the work of our partners our
partners are are having more and more
difficulty uh accessing the healthc care
facilities accessing the patients and
really uh under International
humanitarian law um healthcare workers
should be able to to do their work they
should be able to access patients
patients should be able to access the
healthcare services they need they need
and they should be able to do all of
that safely without being attacked uh
who reported that since October last
October there have been over 500 attacks
on Health Care personnel and Facilities
this is against International
humanitarian law obviously the the
Israelis
um might push back on the term Invasion
and they said that they are targeting um
militants you know terrorists as they
put it um in terms of the the risk to
civilians for any military operation can
you give us a sense of of what life is
like in terms of where people live how
densely packed people
are yes well um based on the reports
we're receiving from our partners uh
people are unable to leave their homes I
mean they're they're basically stranded
in their homes uh while all of this is
happening um while this is happening the
Israeli forces are Destro destructing
the infrastructure so the water system
is destroyed electricity isn't infected
communication lines are are impacted so
people are stranded in their homes
without electricity without water
without being able to go out um in fear
of the snipers and uh one of our
partners reported that some people in t
Kim tried to leave their homes and were
shot out and they immediately returned
to their homes uh about a month ago just
to give you an example about a month ago
we visited and I along with my team we
visited tulam Camp to visit one of our
partners and on the way to the camp we
saw the destruction that had happened
from a previous incursion Israeli
incursion I mean the whole side of the
road one side was uh was fixed and we
were able to drive despite it being a a
dirt road still not paved but the other
side of the road was extremely um dug
deep in very deep down people living on
that side of the road would not be able
to leave their homes because the road is
I don't know how many meters down from
you know from the from where their homes
are so this is the situation Aisha Manu
West Bank director for medical aid for
Palestinians speaking to me earlier